Title: Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.22484v1

Published Time: Fri, 22 May 2026 01:10:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

David M´ endez 1 Roberto Confalonieri 2 Natalia D´ ıaz-Rodr´ ıguez 1

# Abstract 

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) excel at tasks like zero-shot classification and cross-modal re-trieval by mapping images and text to a shared space, but this requires expensive end-to-end train-ing with massive paired datasets. Current post-hoc alignment methods reduce computational costs by connecting pretrained encoders through lightweight mappings, yet still demand substantial paired data. In this work, we investigate the poten-tial of repurposing the classification heads of pre-trained vision models as semantic prototypes . The recycling of these weights, typically discarded af-ter pretraining, unlocks two distinct capabilities: it enables zero-shot alignment by using weights as semantic anchors, and serves as a robust data augmentation strategy by mixing these prototypes with real image-text pairs. We demonstrate that integrating our approach with several state-of-the-art post-hoc alignment techniques consistently boosts accuracy in cross-modal retrieval, zero-and few-shot classification tasks. 

# 1. Introduction 

Vision-language models have demonstrated powerful ca-pabilities—such as zero-shot classification, cross-modal retrieval, image captioning, and visual question answer-ing—by embedding images and text into a shared repre-sentation space. Classic approaches (Radford et al., 2021; Jia et al., 2021) achieve this by jointly training image and text encoders on massive paired datasets. However, collect-ing and curating billions of image-caption pairs and then optimizing two large models end-to-end incurs prohibitive data and computational costs for most researchers and insti-

> 1

Department of Computer Science and Artificial Intelli-gence, DaSCI Institute, University of Granada, Granada, Spain 

> 2

Department of Mathematics “Tullio Levi-Civita”, University of Padova, Padova, Italy. Correspondence to: David M´ endez <davidmendez@ugr.es >.

Accepted at the 43rd International Conference on Machine Learn-ing (ICML 2026). 

tutions, effectively restricting the training of such models to those with considerable resources. Recent decoupled 

techniques (Zhai et al., 2022; Cao et al., 2025) freeze an encoder that is pretrained on one modality and then rely on contrastive training to align the other modality’s encoder to this fixed representation, still requiring substantial paired data and computation. Post-hoc alignment methods (Norelli et al., 2023; Li et al., 2025; Maniparambil et al., 2024) learn lightweight functions that map representations from inde-pendently pretrained encoders to a common latent space, eliminating large-scale contrastive training but still rely-ing on extensive paired image-text data to achieve vision-language alignment. We study whether semantic information already present in supervised vision models can be reused for vision-language alignment. We demonstrate that the classification head weights of vision models pretrained on ImageNet-21K (Rid-nik et al., 2021), which are typically discarded after pretrain-ing, function as high-quality semantic prototypes . By repur-posing classification head weights as semantic prototypes to align an image feature extractor to a text encoder, we en-able vision-language capabilities in two regimes: alignment without any image-text paired data, and a data augmen-tation strategy where these prototypes are combined with real image-text pairs thanks to their intrinsic compatibil-ity. In this post-hoc alignment setting, pretrained encoders are treated as fixed and the focus is on reducing the addi-tional paired data needed to connect them. Our results show promising performance in cross-modal retrieval and classi-fication tasks. In brief, we highlight our key contributions here: • Classification heads as semantic prototypes. We pro-vide empirical validation and theoretical justification for treating classification head weights as meaningful semantic prototypes of the classes they are associated with. We show that the weights for a class align with text representations even better than the average of images belonging to that class. • Vision-language alignment without image-text pairs. 

Leveraging the previous insight, we introduce a weight recycling framework to align independently trained 1

> arXiv:2605.22484v1 [cs.CV] 21 May 2026 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling

image and text encoders in a post-hoc manner without any image-text pairs. • Compatibility with real image-text pairs. We demon-strate that classification head weights are highly com-patible with real image-text representations. Beyond enabling alignment in the absence of paired data, they serve as a robust, complementary data augmentation source that consistently boosts the performance of state-of-the-art post-hoc methods when combined with avail-able image-text pairs. • Analysis of weight representations. We provide geo-metric and domain-specific analyses of classification head weights, including their relationship to down-stream tasks and their separation from image represen-tations. This work offers a new perspective on the emergence of semantics in deep vision models pretrained at scale with supervision, paving the way for alignment strategies that recycle supervised pretraining weights. 

# 2. Related Work 

Vision-Language Models trained from scratch. Pioneer-ing vision-language models like CLIP (Radford et al., 2021) or ALIGN (Jia et al., 2021) jointly train vision and text encoders with a contrastive loss, so that an image and a text are mapped to similar representations if and only if they share the same semantic content. The resulting aligned vision-language space enables zero-shot transfer across downstream tasks without requiring task-specific fine-tuning. More recent approaches demonstrate that powerful off-the-shelf encoders can be leveraged to avoid training both modality encoders. LiT (Zhai et al., 2022) freezes a pretrained vision backbone and trains only the text encoder, while FLAME (Cao et al., 2025) does the opposite–freezing the text model and learning the parameters of the vision encoder. However, these approaches still require substantial computational costs, as they involve training a large encoder with hundreds of millions of parameters. 

Post-hoc vision-language alignment with image-text pairs. A growing body of work focuses on connecting image and text encoders that were not jointly trained. The text-to-concepts framework (Moayeri et al., 2023), for exam-ple, starts with a pretrained vision-only encoder and learns a single-layer MLP that maps its image representations into CLIP’s latent space. The combination of the vision encoder and the MLP, together with CLIP’s text encoder, produces similar representations for images and texts that share the same semantic content, in a manner analogous to CLIP’s original image and text encoders. Additionally, some meth-ods aim to align image and text encoders that have been trained each exclusively on unimodal data. ASIF (Norelli et al., 2023) embeds visual and text data into a common space using a fixed set of image-caption pairs: for a given image, its representation is the vector whose i-th component is the similarity (in the original image encoder’s space) be-tween that image and the i-th image in the fixed set; likewise, for a given text, its representation is the vector whose i-th component is the similarity (in the original text encoder’s space) between that text and the i-th caption in the fixed set. CSA (Li et al., 2025) applies Canonical Correlation Anal-ysis to project pretrained image and text embeddings into a maximal correlation subspace. SAIL (Zhang et al., 2025) contrastively trains two linear transformations on millions of image-caption pairs to align representations from both modalities. The QPA method (Maniparambil et al., 2024) addresses alignment as a seeded graph-matching problem: it formulates a Fast Quadratic Assignment Problem opti-mization that directly aligns the similarity graphs of the two modalities. The issue with these approaches is that they require a sufficiently large and diverse set of multimodal image-text pairs for the alignment to work effectively, which may not be available in many practical domains and thus limits their applicability. 

Zero-shot classification by mapping text to weights. Arelated line of work creates zero-shot classifiers by mapping text representations directly to the weights of image classi-fiers. For example, methods like ICIS (Christensen et al., 2023) and Zero-Shot Natural Language Explanations (Sam-mani & Deligiannis, 2025) use lightweight MLPs to trans-form text embeddings into classification weights. These approaches are constrained to the ImageNet-1K or other more specific domains, limiting their effectiveness beyond these settings. While previous work focuses on either text-to-image align-ment or mapping text to new weights for zero-shot classifi-cation, we take a conceptually different approach by lever-aging the semantic power of usually discarded classification head weights. Specifically, we leverage the larger-scale clas-sification head weights from ImageNet-21K pretraining— despite being noisier than other pretraining sets such as ImageNet-1K—in two distinct ways: they either enable vision-language alignment without any paired data or serve as robust augmentation data for alignment when combined with real image-text pairs. We note that the data cost of endowing a vision encoder with language capabilities is dif-ferent from the (potentially large) datasets used to pre-train the image and text encoder components, which we treat as fixed, off-the-shelf models. 2Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

# 3. Supervised Pretraining Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes 

Let X denote the input image space and fI : X −→ Rd

the image encoder mapping each image into a d-dimensional feature vector. We assume the image encoder fI undergoes a pretraining phase, in which a linear classifier is optimized on top of fI :

W f I (x) + b (1) where W ∈ RC×d, with C denoting the number of classes (e.g., 21,841 in ImageNet-21K), and b ∈ RC is the bias term. During pretraining, W , b, and fI are jointly optimized; afterwards, fI serves as frozen feature extractor. 

Weight vectors encode semantic prototypes. Our core insight is that each row wi of the weight matrix W in Equa-tion (1) functions as a latent prototype of its associated semantic concept. To validate this, we extract the wi vectors corresponding to ImageNet-1K classes from a model pre-trained on ImageNet-21K and compare two classifiers on the ImageNet-1K validation set: (i) the standard linear classifier (dot product + bias), and (ii) a cosine-similarity classifier using cos( wi, f I (x)) . We conduct this experiment across five diverse architectures, including transformers (BEiT, TinyViT), CNNs (ConvNeXt), and hybrids (CAFormer, ConvFormer). As shown in Table 1, the cosine classifier consistently maintains high accuracy (above 80% across all architectures) comparable to the linear baseline. This empirically demonstrates that the directional information in wi encodes a robust representation of the class concept, independent of the bias term or vector magnitude. 

Theoretical framing: Neural Collapse. The Neural Col-lapse phenomenon (Papyan et al., 2020) could be argued to provide theoretical insight into why classifier weight rows serve as class prototypes. This phenomenon describes the convergence of neural network parameters to a geometric configuration with self-duality: the row vector wi of W and the mean of class i representations converge up to rescal-ing. As a consequence, in the training limit, wi becomes the (scaled) class prototype (see Section B in Appendix for mathematical discussion). We must remark, however, that Neural Collapse has been studied under terminal phase train-ing with zero-error, number of classes not exceeding feature dimension, and balanced class distributions. While recent                              

> Table 1. Accuracy (%) on ImageNet-1K validation set for a linear layer W f I(x) + band cosine similarity cos( wi, f I(x)) , where
> wiis W’s i-th row. The high accuracy in the cosine classifier indicates the wis are meaningful representations of their classes, for all encoders.
> Last layer BEiT CAFormer ConvFormer ConvNeXt TinyViT
> W f I(x) + b82.71 80.81 80.76 83.29 82.31
> cos( wi, f I(x)) 82.10 80.28 80.08 82.67 81.30

extensions address some of these limitations individually by adding new technical conditions (Jiang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2022), to the best of our knowledge, there are still gaps between theoretical assumptions and the large-scale pretraining that optimizes the parameters in Equation (1). Hence, we examined the cosine classifier accuracy Table 1 as direct evidence that the wi vectors encode meaningful class representations, even when the conditions for Neural Collapse are not fully satisfied. 

Comparison of Semantic Alignment: Head weights vs Averaged Image Representations. Beyond justifying why weight rows can serve as class prototypes, we investi-gate how well they align with language . We compare the alignment of (a) weight vectors wi and (b) averaged im-age embeddings against the text embeddings of their class names. We employ the mutual k-nearest-neighbor align-ment metric ( mN N ) (Huh et al., 2024), which measures the preservation of semantic neighborhoods across modalities. This metric measures how well two spaces preserve seman-tic neighborhoods. We extract the 1,000 row vectors wisfrom the ImageNet-21K classification head matrix that cor-respond to ImageNet-1K classes and compute their mN N 

alignment scores with the text embeddings of the corre-sponding class names. In parallel, we compute mN N scores for averaged image embeddings from the ImageNet-1K val-idation set, where we vary the number of images n per class used in each average ( n ∈ { 1, 5, 10 , 20 , 30 , 40 , 50 }, with 50 representing the full validation set per class). Figure 1 shows that row vectors from the classification head matrix consistently achieve higher mN N scores than averaged im-age embeddings across all values of n and neighborhood sizes k ∈ { 3, 5, 10 }. This suggests that classification heads exhibit stronger semantic alignment with text embeddings than the average of visual features, making W a superior anchor for vision-language alignment. Overall, these findings establish classification head weights as high-quality semantic prototypes that are intrinsically aligned with language. 

# 4. Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

Building upon the insight that classification head weights, typically discarded after large-scale supervised pretraining, can be leveraged as semantic prototypes, we propose a framework to repurpose them for vision-language align-ment. We integrate these classification heads into post-hoc alignment methodologies (Figure 2) to achieve two main ob-jectives: first, to unlock vision-language capabilities in the complete absence of paired data (alignment without image-text pairs); and second, to demonstrate that these weight representations are compatible with real image-text pairs, 3Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling           

> Figure 1. Mutual k-NN alignment ( mN N ) to text representations for classification head vectors (dashed) and averaged image em-beddings (solid) as a function of the number of images per class
> n. Multiple neighbors k∈ { 3,5,10 }are tested. Representations are computed using the non-aligned BEiT-B/16 (Bao et al., 2021) image encoder and CLIP’s text encoder. Across all tested kand n,classification heads exhibit higher alignment to the text representa-tions than image representation averages.

allowing them to be combined to boost the performance of existing post-hoc alignment methods. In both regimes, we evaluate the resulting aligned models on classification and cross-modal retrieval downstream tasks. We begin by formulating the post-hoc alignment problem. 

General post-hoc alignment setting. By post-hoc align-ment, we refer to methods that learn lightweight functions to align independently pretrained encoders, without modifying the encoder parameters. We formulate this task mathemati-cally. Let X denote the input image space and T denote the input text space. We define our image and text encoders as: 

fI : X −→ Rd and fT : T −→ Rd,

where fI maps each image into a d-dimensional feature vector and fT maps text inputs into d-dimensional feature vectors. If fI and fT had been jointly optimized with a contrastive loss as in CLIP (Radford et al., 2021), then 

d = d and they would satisfy 

fI (x) ≈ fT (t)

for image-text pairs (x, t ) with the same semantic content (i.e. an image and a textual description of it), while pushing apart pairs with different semantic content. In the post-hoc alignment setting, we assume independently pretrained encoders, thus fI and fT are not aligned. To bridge this gap, the objective is that lightweight functions g : Rd → Rs

and g : Rd → Rs are learned to map each modality’s space into a common space Rs of dimension s, such that for any image-text pair (x, t ) sharing the same semantic content, 

g(fI (x)) ≈ g(fT (t)) (2) To learn g and g, an alignment dataset 

eDimgtxt = {(xj , t j )}pj=1 ⊆ X × T 

with p image-text pairs is used. Since g and g act on the image and text representation spaces respectively, we only need the representations of image-text pairs in eDimgtxt to learn g and g. Thus, we define a dataset Dimgtxt as 

Dimgtxt = {(fI (xj ), f T (tj )) }pj=1 

and focus on it instead of on the original image-text align-ment dataset eDimgtxt . In the case of CSA (Li et al., 2025) and SAIL (Zhang et al., 2025), g and g are linear projec-tions learned using Canonical Correlation analysis and con-trastive learning respectively. ASIF (Norelli et al., 2023) uses a fixed set Dimgtxt of image-text representations and defines g as the function taking an image representation to a vector of similarities with respect to the vision part of 

Dimgtxt and analogous with g and text representations. In contrast to ASIF and CSA, the text-to-concepts approach (Moayeri et al., 2023) takes a different strategy. Instead of learning two lightweight mappings that project both modali-ties into a third representation space, it learns either g or g

to project one modality’s representation space into the other modality’s representation. In the rest of this section, we show how classification heads can be recycled to both unlock language capabilities in vision-only backbones without paired data and augment real image-text pairs to boost alignment performance. We do so by leveraging post-hoc alignment methods as an appli-cation of our central finding: classifier weights discarded after pretraining constitute valuable reusable semantic an-chors. This application is most relevant when a specific supervised vision backbone should be retained, for example because of deployment constraints, computational efficiency, architectural requirements, or compatibility with existing interpretability tools. Throughout these experiments, the image and text encoders are treated as fixed off-the-shelf components, therefore, any discussion of data and computa-tional cost discussion refers only to the additional alignment step. In addition to two state-of-the-art post-hoc alignment meth-ods, such as CSA (Li et al., 2025) and text-to-concepts (Moayeri et al., 2023), operating in a low data regime, we employ a strong baseline that trains a lightweight MLP to map text representations to image representations, which we refer to as MLP-alignment. This approach—using a lightweight MLP trained with image-text pairs to align vi-sion and language encoders—has been widely adopted in the literature, dating back to early image-text alignment works such as (Frome et al., 2013). In particular, we choose a two-layer MLP, as this proved to yield better results than a single-layer MLP, and train it with cosine-similarity loss. Once the vision backbone has been endowed with language capabilities via post-hoc alignment, we evaluate its per-formance on classification benchmarks and cross-modal 4Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling          

> (a) (b) Figure 2. Approach to leverage classification heads in post-hoc representation alignment. (a) Illustration of the post-hoc alignment setting, in which lightweight functions gand gare learned to map representations from independently trained image and text encoder to an image-text aligned space. (b) We recycle the classification head weights from ImageNet-21K pretraining with their class names to augment image-text data for learning gand g. Recycled weights can also be used alone to unlock alignment without image-text pairs.

retrieval tasks (image-to-text and text-to-image retrieval). Throughout this section, we use the BEiT-B/16 (Bao et al., 2021) image encoder and CLIP’s ViT-B/32 text encoder (Radford et al., 2021) as our image and text encoder re-spectively. Further experiments on tasks using additional image and text encoders—also those trained solely on text, such as RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019) or MPNET (Song et al., 2020)—along with technical details (e.g., hyperparameters, hardware, training time) and code are provided in the Ap-pendix. As a remark, we note that learning the g and g

functions in our experiments is computationally inexpen-sive, requiring less than 2 minutes on a single GPU. 

4.1. Vision-language alignment with no image-text pairs. 

As an application of the insight that classification head weights serve as semantic prototypes, we show how they can be leveraged to enable post-hoc vision-language alignment in the complete absence of paired image-text data, i.e., when 

Dimgtxt = ∅. In such a case, we recycle the row vectors 

wi of W as semantic prototypes and pair them with the text embeddings of their corresponding class names. Formally, we define the dataset 

Dweights = { wi, f T (ti)}Ci=1 

where ti is the name of the i-th class in the pretraining dataset (e.g., ’A tench’, ’A tree frog’, etc.). We then use 

Dweights to learn the alignment functions g and g as in Equa-tion (2). This approach effectively aligns the image and text encoders without requiring any paired image-text data, un-locking zero-shot vision-language capabilities. We assess the performance of the resulting aligned models on zero-shot classification and cross-modal retrieval. 

Zero-shot classification. In Figure 3, we report the zero-shot classification accuracy of the MLP-aligned model us-ing weight-only data, comparing results obtained from ImageNet-1K and ImageNet-21K pre-training weights. Al-though ImageNet-21K classification head weights are nois-ier due to class hierarchy complexity, they provide repre-sentations for significantly more classes than ImageNet-1K, which appears to be the key factor driving performance. The figure also includes results where we combine classification weights with a few image-text pairs, which further improves performance as discussed in Section 4.2. 

Cross-modal retrieval. Cross-modal retrieval results us-ing MLP, CSA, and text-to-concepts methods are reported in Appendix Table 4, demonstrating that weight-only align-ment enables retrieval capabilities significantly above ran-dom chance. Our experiments show that even without any paired image-text data, leveraging classification head weights enables meaningful vision-language alignment and yields competitive results across downstream tasks. 

4.2. Compatibility of weights and image representations. 

Beyond enabling alignment without paired data, we demon-strate that classification head weights are compatible with image representations, as these weights can be combined with real image-text pairs to augment the alignment dataset 

Dimgtxt . In this setting, we define the augmented alignment dataset as 

Daug = Dimgtxt 

[ Dweights (3) which is then used to learn g and g.5Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

Figure 3. Zero-shot classification accuracy of BEiT-B/16 (Bao et al., 2021) aligned to text with an MLP. Stacked bars show the progressive accuracy gains: base performance when only classification head weights from ImageNet-1K pretraining are used during the MLP aligner training, additional gain from using ImageNet-21K weights, and further improvement from incorporating one image-caption pair per class, for all nine datasets at once. Red dashed lines show CLIP ViT-B/16 accuracy. 

Zero-shot classification. In addition to the already dis-cussed alignment without image-text pairs, Figure 3 also reports results when, following Equation (3) a small set of image-text pairs is used along the classification head weights from ImageNet-21K pretraining. Specifically, we add as Dimgtxt the pairs (fI (x), f T (t)) , where one image 

x is sampled from each class in each dataset and paired with an (LLM-generated) caption t. We note that we train a single MLP and then test zero-shot accuracy in all datasets. 

(a) Img-to-Txt mAP gain (b) Img-to-Txt P@1 gain 

(c) Img-to-Txt P@5 gain (d) Txt-to-Img P@1 gain 

Figure 4. Gains in F LICKR 30K retrieval when augmenting image-text representations Dimgtxt with classification head weights from ImageNet-21K pretraining Dweights . The x-axis shows the size of Dimgtxt . Post-hoc alignment techniques include CSA (Li et al., 2025), Text-to-Concept (Moayeri et al., 2023) and MLP alignment. Results show that augmenting with Dweights provides the largest gains in the low-data regime, with benefits diminishing as Dimgtxt 

grows—an expected outcome. 

Since the total sum of classes across all nine datasets is 817 ,the ratio between the size of Dimgtxt and the total align-ment dataset Daug is 817 817+21 ,841 ≈ 0.036 . Figure 3 shows that adding image-text representation pairs Dimgtxt further improves performance, but the gains vary by task dataset. Datasets with high class overlap with ImageNet-21K (e.g., CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100) show minimal improvements when including text-image pairs, suggesting these provide di-minishing returns when visual categories are already well-represented in the weight representations Dweights .We note that the BEiT-B/16 zero-shot classifier is obtained with little additional data and computation once the pre-trained encoders and classification head are available. With respect to the alignment step, augmenting with the weight representations from ImageNet-21K pretraining uses only 817 image-caption pairs, while the lightweight MLP re-quires only two GPU-minutes of training. Additionally, while ImageNet-21K pretraining weight representations may contain semantic overlap with downstream benchmarks, we note that CLIP has also likely seen most of the classes in the downstream classification benchmarks (Xu et al., 2024). For instance, (Xu et al., 2024) reconstructs CLIP’s data cu-ration process and finds over 700 out of the 1K classes in ImageNet-1K present in pretraining metadata and observes a correlation between downstream zero-shot classification accuracy and the number of classes matched the metadata. 

Cross-modal retrieval. To further explore compatibility of image-text paired data and classification weight repre-sentations for post-hoc augmentation techniques, we con-duct experiments on cross-modal retrieval. For the three alignment techniques (MLP, CSA and Text2Concepts), we use Daug with Dimgtxt composed of F LICKR 30K training samples (0 to 30 K pairs), then evaluate the aligned image and text encoders in the cross-modal retrieval task on the 6Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

FLICKR 30K test set. As more training image-text pairs from F LICKR 30K are used in Dimgtxt , the retrieval gains from augmenting the training set with classification head weights steadily diminish, tending towards zero when the full ∼30 K samples are used. This implies that augmenting the image-text pairs with the weight representations delivers the largest benefits in the low-data regime, with gains that diminish as more image-text pairs become available. 

Few-shot classification. Beyond cross-modal retrieval and zero-shot classification, our approach can be used for few-shot classification through two main steps. (i) Initial alignment : Train a lightweight MLP (the same used in the retrieval and zero-shot setting) to map text representations to image representations using only the ImageNet-21K classification head (no image–text pairs). (ii) Fine-tuning on image–text data : Further fine-tune this MLP on Dimgtxt , which consists of image–text pairs from the target few-shot dataset 

 fI (x), f T (“A photo of ⟨class ⟩”)

We employ sequential rather than joint training on the com-bined dataset Daug = Dimgtxt 

S Dweights to make the alignment more focused on the specific classification do-main of interest. Classification is done by finding the class such that the prompt A photo of <class > is most aligned with the image representation. We evaluate our approach against two strong baselines on frozen backbones: the Near-est Centroid Classifier (NCC) and K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN). The NCC, which computes class centroids from training representations and assigns test images to the near-est centroid, has been shown to be remarkably effective for few-shot classification, often surpassing more complex meta-learning approaches (Luo et al., 2023). We test across different classification tasks and standard few-shot settings with 1, 2 and 4 shots per class. Results in Table 2 (see exper-iments in additional datasets in Table 11 in the Appendix) show that our classifier performs significantly better than NCC and KNN in most cases. We acknowledge that a cosine classifier with simple text prompts ( A photo of <class >)may be suboptimal for few-shot scenarios. Future work could explore prompt tuning or adapter-based approaches with the aligned vision-language model. However, our re-sults demonstrate that even this straightforward approach surpasses strong baselines like NCC, validating the effective-ness of our weight recycling strategy for few-shot learning. 

4.3. Further analyses. 

In these additional analyses, we compare weights to image representations, evaluate how domain-specific weights af-fect downstream performance, and examine the geometric distribution of weight representations. 

Table 2. Performance comparison across few-shot methods and number of shots per class K. Best results with statistical signifi-cance are in bold.                                          

> KMethod CIFAR10 CIFAR100 DTD PLACES
> 1Ours 93.34 ±0.27 75.14 ±0.25 47.36 ±1.34 35.51 %±0.22
> NCC 76.03 ±3.95 49.98 ±0.96 42.01 ±2.69 21.96 %±0.71
> KNN 76.03 ±3.95 49.98 ±0.96 42.01 ±2.69 21.96 %±0.71
> 2Ours 93.86 ±0.49 75.77 ±0.09 53.73 ±1.72 35.94 %±0.22
> NCC 86.83 ±1.66 61.64 ±0.86 52.76 ±1.73 30.22 %±0.51
> KNN 71.67 ±4.65 48.50 ±0.80 41.58 ±3.04 22.49 %±0.38
> 4Ours 94.81 ±0.36 76.42 ±0.22 62.04 ±0.95 41.98 %±0.35
> NCC 91.01 ±1.40 71.35 ±0.60 61.54 ±1.13 38.71 %±0.36
> KNN 84.69 ±1.15 62.41 ±0.56 51.64 ±1.51 28.77 %±0.34

Table 3. Flickr30K zero-shot retrieval performance. We compare MLP-alignment recycling 1K ImageNet weight representations against the same number of averaged image representation pairs. 

Metric Weight repr. Image repr. 

i2t mAP 0.2751 0.1860 i2t P@1 0.3230 0.2110 i2t P@5 0.2388 0.1566 t2i P@1 0.2212 0.1406 

Weight representations outperform image representa-tions under an equal alignment-data budget. In Figure 1 we showed that classification head weights exhibit stronger semantic alignment with text embeddings than averaged im-age representations. This suggests that classification heads are superior anchors for vision-language alignment. To evaluate this claim in a downstream task, we compare the effectiveness of aligning using image-text pairs vs classi-fication head weights. Specifically, we endow BEiT-B/16 with language capabilities via MLP-alignment using two different alignment datasets of equal size: (i) classification head weights from ImageNet-1K paired with their class names, and (ii) pairs composed of average image repre-sentations paired with their class name from ImageNet-1K. We then evaluate the aligned models on Flickr30K cross-modal retrieval. Results in Table 3 show that alignment using classification head weights consistently outperforms alignment using image-text pairs, despite the latter match-ing the downstream task’s data modality. This confirms that recycled classification head weights are more effective for vision-language alignment than image representations, confirming in a downstream task our earlier analysis based on semantic alignment metric mN N . Additional controls in the Appendix compare against one randomly sampled image representation per class and report a complementary zero-shot classification comparison (Tables 6 and 7). 

ImageNet-21K pretraining weights yield the best down-stream performance ImageNet-1K and ImageNet-21K are among the most widely employed publicly available labeled datasets for transfer learning (Ridnik et al., 2021). 7Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

While other datasets such as Places365 or iNaturalist have also been used for transfer learning (Plested & Gedeon, 2022), they are less general and provide far fewer off-the-shelf pretrained checkpoints compared to the ImageNet benchmarks. ImageNet-1K dataset offers a clean and bal-anced structure: all classes contain the same number of samples, and each class corresponds to a leaf synset in WordNet—specific nouns with no hyponyms in WordNet ontology (e.g., “chihuahua” but not “mammal”)—ensuring semantic disjointness. By contrast, ImageNet-21K has an imbalanced class distribution and includes both leaf and non-leaf synsets (e.g., “chihuahua” and “mammal”), which introduces noise into the classification task from which the classification head weights are learned. Nonetheless, ImageNet-1K’s clean, uniform structure comes at the cost of limited concept diversity. Instead, ImageNet-21K, with approximately 21 times more weights, provides a much richer set of semantic representations for vision-language alignment. This increased scale compensates for the possi-ble noise caused by overlapping categories and class imbal-ance as seen in the better downstream performance shown in Figure 3. In addition to general domain datasets as ImageNet-1K and ImageNet-21K, we analyze how down-stream performance is affected when using classification head weights from more specialized datasets. Section J in the Appendix presents experiments using classification head weights from iNaturalist-2021 (Van Horn et al., 2018), a large-scale dataset focused on natural species. While Ta-ble 12 in the Appendix shows recycling iNaturalist-2021 weights unlocks non-trivial vision-language alignment ca-pabilities, performance on the classification benchmark is significantly lower than when using ImageNet-21K weights. This suggests that the generality and diversity of concepts in ImageNet-21K are key for effective vision-language align-ment without paired data. 

Modality Gap Between Classification Head Weights and Image Representations. Inspired by the text-image modality gap observed in models like CLIP (Liang et al., 2022), we investigate whether a similar separation exists between classification weights wis and image representa-tions. Following the analysis procedure from the modality gap seminal work (Liang et al., 2022), our findings confirm a statistically significant gap: a permutation test on dis-tances between centroids of both modalities showed that the observed distance (0.1723) was substantially larger than ex-pected by chance (mean 0.0446, p <0.001). Furthermore, a simple single-layer MLP trained to distinguish between the two representation types achieved near-perfect test accuracy (99.75%). This systematic separation suggests that despite semantic alignment, classification weights and image fea-tures occupy distinct regions in the latent space. Figure 5 displays a UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018) visualization of weights and image representations where a separation be-  

> Figure 5. UMAP (McInnes et al., 2018) of class representations. Blue and red points show average image representation and weights
> wirespectively. Lines connect pairs from the same class.

tween the two modalities can be observed. Although we pre-sented preliminary attempts to mitigate this gap in Section I (e.g., via centering and rescaling or lightweight projections), these simple strategies did not result in downstream tasks performance gains. We leave a more thorough investigation of this modality gap and its mitigation to future work. In spite of this gap, our results demonstrate that classification head weights are still compatible with image representations for vision-language alignment, as their combination boosts downstream tasks performance (e.g., Figure 6). 

# 5. Limitations and Future Work 

We aligned image and text encoders by combining image-text pairs and classification heads in the same dataset, as our goal was to demonstrate the compatibility of the two types of representations with this conceptually simple approach. However, we showed that an analogue to the well-known image-text modality gap (Liang et al., 2022) also occurs in the image representation space between images and row vectors wis of the classification head matrix. Although we presented preliminary attempts to mitigate this gap in Section I (e.g., via centering and rescaling or lightweight projections), these simple strategies did not result in perfor-mance gains. Thus, finding more sophisticated approaches for combining image-text pairs and classification weight rep-resentations remains an interesting future research direction to further improve alignment. Another natural extension would be to combine classifier heads from multiple super-vised datasets. Such a combination is meaningful only when the heads are linear classifiers over the same frozen image feature space; otherwise, their row vectors live in incompati-ble coordinate systems. In addition, beyond the applications demonstrated in this work, a vision-language model enables capabilities that vision-only backbones cannot provide. For example, one could explore prompt tuning methodologies 8Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

such as CoOp (Zhou et al., 2022b) and CoCoOp (Zhou et al., 2022a), Visual QA (Song et al., 2022) or image captioning with text-only training (Li et al., 2023). Our approach opens the door to apply these methods to vision-only models in a fast, efficient way. 

# 6. Conclusion 

In this work, we have presented a novel framework for post-hoc vision-language alignment based on the obser-vation that supervised classification head weights encode reusable semantic prototypes. By identifying and repur-posing the classification head weights of pretrained vision models, we found a valuable source of representations that is typically discarded after pretraining. Our extensive ex-periments demonstrate that this weight recycling strategy is effective in two distinct regimes. First, it enables zero-shot alignment in the complete absence of image-text pairs during the alignment step, transforming unimodal vision backbones into vision-language models with minimal ad-ditional computation. Second, it serves as a powerful data augmentation technique that consistently boosts the perfor-mance of state-of-the-art post-hoc alignment methods in low-data scenarios, particularly for cross-modal retrieval and classification tasks. By reducing the additional data and compute barriers for post-hoc alignment, our approach contributes to the goals of Green AI. We hope this work inspires further research into the latent semantic potential of supervised pretraining weights and their application in resource-efficient representation learning. 

# Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the Junta de Andaluc ´ıa Predoc-toral 2024 programme (DGP PRED 2024 00569), under the call of the Consejer ´ıa de Universidad, Investigaci ´on e Innovaci ´on for predoctoral contracts for researchers in train-ing, co-financed by the Fondo Social Europeo Plus (FSE+) through the Andaluc ´ıa 2021–2027 programme, and the TSI-100927-2023-1 project under the Recovery, Transforma-tion and Resilience Plan funded by the European Union NextGenerationEU through the Ministry for Digital Trans-formation and the Civil Service. 

# Impact Statement 

This work shows how classification heads, by-products of supervised pretraining, can be used to make vision-language alignment more data- and compute-efficient. This may broaden access to vision-language capabilities without requiring CLIP-scale paired-data training. However, the method inherits biases, label noise, licensing constraints, and semantic coverage limits from the pretrained models, classifier heads, and any image-text data used for alignment. 

# References 

Bao, H., Dong, L., Piao, S., and Wei, F. Beit: Bert pre-training of image transformers. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations , 2021. Bossard, L., Guillaumin, M., and Van Gool, L. Food-101 – mining discriminative components with random forests. In Fleet, D., Pajdla, T., Schiele, B., and Tuytelaars, T. (eds.), Computer Vision – ECCV 2014 , pp. 446–461, Cham, 2014. Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-319-10599-4. Cao, A., Wei, X., and Ma, Z. Flame: Frozen large language models enable data-efficient language-image pre-training. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition Conference , pp. 4080–4090, 2025. Cheng, G., Han, J., and Lu, X. Remote sensing image scene classification: Benchmark and state of the art. Pro-ceedings of the IEEE , 105(10):1865–1883, 2017. doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2017.2675998. Christensen, A., Mancini, M., Koepke, A., Winther, O., and Akata, Z. Image-free classifier injection for zero-shot classification. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision , pp. 19072– 19081, 2023. Cimpoi, M., Maji, S., Kokkinos, I., Mohamed, S., and Vedaldi, A. Describing textures in the wild. In 2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition ,pp. 3606–3613, 2014. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2014.461. Frome, A., Corrado, G. S., Shlens, J., Bengio, S., Dean, J., Ranzato, M. A., and Mikolov, T. Devise: A deep visual-semantic embedding model. In Burges, C., Bot-tou, L., Welling, M., Ghahramani, Z., and Weinberger, K. (eds.), Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 26. Curran Associates, Inc., 2013. Helber, P., Bischke, B., Dengel, A., and Borth, D. Eu-roSAT: A novel dataset and deep learning benchmark for land use and land cover classification. IEEE Jour-nal of Selected Topics in Applied Earth Observations and Remote Sensing , 12(7):2217–2226, 2019. doi: 10.1109/JSTARS.2019.2918242. Hendrycks, D. and Gimpel, K. Gaussian error linear units (GELUs), 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/ 1606.08415 .Huh, M., Cheung, B., Wang, T., and Isola, P. Position: The platonic representation hypothesis. In Forty-first International Conference on Machine Learning , 2024. Jia, C., Yang, Y., Xia, Y., Chen, Y., Parekh, P., Pham, H., and Le, Q. V. Scaling up visual and vision-language 9Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

representation learning with noisy text supervision. In 

International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 316– 326. PMLR, 2021. Jiang, J., Zhou, J. Z., Wang, P., Qu, Q., Mixon, D., You, C., and Zhu, Z. Generalized neural collapse for a large num-ber of classes. In International Conference in Machine Learning (ICML) . Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-search, 2024. Karpathy, A. and Fei-Fei, L. Deep visual-semantic align-ments for generating image descriptions. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 3128–3137, 2015. Krizhevsky, A. and Hinton, G. Learning multiple layers of features from tiny images. Techni-cal report, University of Toronto, 2009. URL 

https://www.cs.toronto.edu/˜kriz/ learning-features-2009-TR.pdf .Li, P.-h., Chinchali, S. P., and Topcu, U. Csa: Data-efficient mapping of unimodal features to multimodal features. In 

International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2025. Li, W., Zhu, L., Wen, L., and Yang, Y. Decap: Decoding clip latents for zero-shot captioning via text-only training. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations , 2023. Liang, V. W., Zhang, Y., Kwon, Y., Yeung, S., and Zou, J. Y. Mind the gap: Understanding the modality gap in multi-modal contrastive representation learning. Ad-vances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 35: 17612–17625, 2022. Lin, T.-Y., Maire, M., Belongie, S., Hays, J., Perona, P., Ra-manan, D., Doll ´ar, P., and Zitnick, C. L. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In European conference on computer vision , pp. 740–755. Springer, 2014. Liu, Y., Ott, M., Goyal, N., Du, J., Joshi, M., Chen, D., Levy, O., Lewis, M., Zettlemoyer, L., and Stoyanov, V. Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining approach. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692 , 2019. Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F. Sgdr: Stochastic gradient descent with warm restarts. In International Confer-ence on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2017. URL 

https://arxiv.org/abs/1608.03983 .Loshchilov, I. and Hutter, F. Decoupled weight decay reg-ularization. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2019. Luo, X., Wu, H., Zhang, J., Gao, L., Xu, J., and Song, J. A closer look at few-shot classification again. In Inter-national Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 23103– 23123. PMLR, 2023. Maniparambil, M., Akshulakov, R., Djilali, Y. A. D., El Amine Seddik, M., Narayan, S., Mangalam, K., and O’Connor, N. E. Do vision and language encoders represent the world similarly? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 14334–14343, 2024. McInnes, L., Healy, J., Saul, N., and Großberger, L. Umap: Uniform manifold approximation and projection. Journal of Open Source Software , 3(29), 2018. Moayeri, M., Rezaei, K., Sanjabi, M., and Feizi, S. Text-to-concept (and back) via cross-model alignment. In In-ternational Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 25037– 25060. PMLR, 2023. Nilsback, M.-E. and Zisserman, A. Automated flower classification over a large number of classes. In 2008 Sixth Indian Conference on Computer Vision, Graph-ics & Image Processing , pp. 722–729, 2008. doi: 10.1109/ICVGIP.2008.47. Norelli, A., Fumero, M., Maiorca, V., Moschella, L., Rodola, E., and Locatello, F. Asif: Coupled data turns unimodal models to multimodal without training. Advances in Neu-ral Information Processing Systems , 36:15303–15319, 2023. Papyan, V., Han, X., and Donoho, D. L. Prevalence of neural collapse during the terminal phase of deep learn-ing training. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 117(40):24652–24663, 2020. Parkhi, O. M., Vedaldi, A., Zisserman, A., and Jawahar, C. V. Cats and dogs. In 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 3498–3505, 2012. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2012.6248092. Plested, J. and Gedeon, T. Deep transfer learning for image classification: a survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09904 ,2022. Plummer, B. A., Wang, L., Cervantes, C. M., Caicedo, J. C., Hockenmaier, J., and Lazebnik, S. Flickr30k entities: Collecting region-to-phrase correspondences for richer image-to-sentence models. In Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision , pp. 2641– 2649, 2015. Radford, A., Kim, J. W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G., Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In International Conference on Machine Learning , pp. 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 10 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

Ridnik, T., Ben-Baruch, E., Noy, A., and Zelnik-Manor, L. Imagenet-21k pretraining for the masses, 2021. Sammani, F. and Deligiannis, N. Zero-shot natural language explanations. In International Conference on Learning Representations , 2025. Song, H., Dong, L., Zhang, W., Liu, T., and Wei, F. Clip models are few-shot learners: Empirical studies on vqa and visual entailment. In Annual Meeting of the Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics , 2022. Song, K., Tan, X., Qin, T., Lu, J., and Liu, T.-Y. Mpnet: Masked and permuted pre-training for language under-standing. Advances in neural information processing systems , 33:16857–16867, 2020. Stewart, A. J., Robinson, C., Corley, I. A., Ortiz, A., Lavista Ferres, J. M., and Banerjee, A. TorchGeo: Deep learning with geospatial data. ACM Transactions on Spatial Algorithms and Systems , December 2024. doi: 10.1145/3707459. URL https://doi.org/10. 1145/3707459 .Tschandl, P., Rosendahl, C., and Kittler, H. The ham10000 dataset, a large collection of multi-source dermatoscopic images of common pigmented skin lesions. Scientific data , 5(1):1–9, 2018. Van Horn, G., Mac Aodha, O., Song, Y., Cui, Y., Sun, C., Shepard, A., Adam, H., Perona, P., and Belongie, S. The inaturalist species classification and detection dataset. In 

2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , pp. 8769–8778. IEEE, 2018. Wightman, R. Pytorch image models. https://github. com/rwightman/pytorch-image-models ,2019. Xu, H., Xie, S., Tan, X. E., Huang, P.-Y., Howes, R., Sharma, V., Li, S.-W., Ghosh, G., Zettlemoyer, L., and Feicht-enhofer, C. Demystifying clip data. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) , 2024. Yang, Y., Chen, S., Li, X., Xie, L., Lin, Z., and Tao, D. Inducing neural collapse in imbalanced learning: Do we really need a learnable classifier at the end of deep neural network? Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:37991–38002, 2022. Zhai, X., Wang, X., Mustafa, B., Steiner, A., Keysers, D., Kolesnikov, A., and Beyer, L. LiT: Zero-shot transfer with locked-image text tuning. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , pp. 18123–18133, 2022. Zhang, L., Yang, Q., and Agrawal, A. Assessing and learn-ing alignment of unimodal vision and language models. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-nition Conference , pp. 14604–14614, 2025. Zhou, B., Lapedriza, A., Khosla, A., Oliva, A., and Tor-ralba, A. Places: A 10 million image database for scene recognition. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 40(6):1452–1464, 2018. doi: 10.1109/TPAMI.2017.2723009. Zhou, K., Yang, J., Loy, C. C., and Liu, Z. Conditional prompt learning for vision-language models. In Proceed-ings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , pp. 16816–16825, 2022a. Zhou, K., Yang, J., Loy, C. C., and Liu, Z. Learning to prompt for vision-language models. International Jour-nal of Computer Vision , 130(9):2337–2348, 2022b. 11 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

# A. Code 

All code is available at: https://github.com/david-mnd/recycling4vlalignment 

# B. Classification head weights row vectors as prototypes for the cosine classifier 

In the main text, we provided empirical evidence (see Table 1) that the row vectors wi of a classification head W can serve as effective class prototypes for a cosine classifier. We also briefly mentioned the Neural Collapse (NC) phenomenon (Papyan et al., 2020) as a potential theoretical basis, although the gaps between the ideal assumptions in NC and our setting lead us to provide experimental results as evidence. This appendix provides a more detailed discussion for using the classification weights wi as class prototypes in the cosine classifier, proceeding in two parts: first, an intuitive view, and second, a more formal justification via the properties of Neural Collapse. 

An intuitive view with degrees of freedom . A linear classifier on a point x is defined by argmax iwTi x + bi. The decision is based on the direction of the weight vector wi, its magnitude (norm) || wi|| , and the bias scalar bi. On the other hand, in the cosine classifier the decision rule becomes argmax i cos( wi, x ) = argmax i

 wTi x

|| wi|||| x|| 



= argmax i

 wTi x

|| wi|| 

 (4) In Equation (4), the norm and the bias take no part in the classification, as only the directional information of wi matters. For a d-dimensional feature space (e.g., d = 768 ), the score for each class depends on d + 1 parameters ( wi ∈ Rd and 

bi ∈ R). The normalized vector wi/|| wi|| retains d − 1 degrees of freedom (the direction on the hypersphere), ”losing” only 2 parameters (the magnitude and bias). The central hypothesis, supported by our empirical results in Table 1, is that the vast majority of the semantic, class-identifying information is encoded in the direction of this d-dimensional vector, not its magnitude or bias. The theoretical framework of Neural Collapse formalizes this intuition. 

Formal explanation via Neural Collapse (NC) . The Neural Collapse (NC) phenomenon (Papyan et al., 2020) describes the geometric structure of the final-layer features and classifier weights during the terminal phase of cross-entropy training (i.e., after achieving near-zero training error). The key properties for us are 1:• (NC1) Variability Collapse: The feature vectors x for all training samples belonging to a class i collapse to their class mean, or centroid, μi.• (NC3) Convergence to Self-Duality: The classifier’s weight vectors wi (from the W x + b layer) converge to be their corresponding class centroids μi up to rescaling by a scalar. • (NC4) Simplification to Nearest Class-Center: The W x + b classifier converges to be equivalent to a nearest-centroid classifier, i.e., argmax i(wTi x + bi) → argmin i|| x − μi|| 

We show these conditions lead to an equivalence between the linear classifier and the cosine classifier using wis rows as representations. First, we assume as in our setting, our features x to be L2-normalized, so || x|| = 1 . From (NC1) , all features in a class i collapse to their centroid μi, which implies in the training limit the centroids themselves must also be normalized (as they are equal to any of the representations of the points in the class), so || μi|| = 1 . From (NC3) , the weights wi align with these centroids μi; given that || μi|| = 1 , the ”up to rescaling” property simplifies, and the normalized weight vector 

and the class centroid converge to each other: μi → wi/|| wi|| . Finally, from (NC4) , the W x + b classifier converges to a nearest-centroid classifier, argmax i(wTi x + bi) → argmin i|| x − μi|| 2. By substituting the result from (NC3) into (NC4) , we see that the W x + b classifier, at convergence, becomes equivalent to a classifier that finds the nearest normalized weight vector : argmax i(wTi x + bi) → argmin i|| x − wi/|| wi|| || . Now we see this is the same as the cosine classifier on the rows of 

> 1NC2 refers to the geometric configuration of class centroids and classifier’s weight vectors, which is not relevant for our purposes.

12 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

the weight matrix. Since we assumed || x|| = 1 , we have: 

x − wi

|| wi|| 

> 2

= || x|| 2 − 2 wTi x

|| wi|| + wi

|| wi|| 

> 2

= 1 − 2 wTi x

|| wi|| + 1 = 2(1 − wTi x

|| wi|| )

(5) Hence argmin i x − wi

|| wi|| = argmin i x − wi

|| wi|| 

> 2(5)

= argmin i



2(1 − wTi x

|| wi|| )



= argmax i

 wTi x

|| wi|| 



> (4)

= argmax i cos ( wi, x )

(6) Thus argmax i(wTi x + bi) → argmax i cos ( wi, x ), that is, the linear classifier becomes the cosine classifier on the rows of the weight matrix. As noted in the main text, the formal theory of Neural Collapse relies on strong assumptions (e.g., balanced data, number of classes less than the feature dimension, zero training error). While recent extensions address some of these limitations individually by adding new technical conditions (Jiang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2022), to the best of our knowledge, there are still gaps between theoretical assumptions and our setting. This is why the direct empirical validation in Table 1 remains a crucial piece of evidence supporting our approach. 

# C. Datasets 

Retrieval. Evaluation of our data augmentation technique in retrieval setting is carried out on Flickr30K (Plummer et al., 2015), a widely-used benchmark for image-text retrieval tasks. The dataset contains 31,000 images collected from Flickr, each annotated with five human-written captions describing the visual content. To further validate the effectiveness of our approach, we also provide extended retrieval experiments on the MS-COCO dataset (Lin et al., 2014) in the appendix. MS-COCO is a large-scale dataset comprising over 120,000 images with diverse scenes and objects, each paired with five human-annotated captions. For both datasets, we follow the standard evaluation protocol using the widely-employed Karpathy splits (Karpathy & Fei-Fei, 2015). 

Classification. We evaluate our approach for zero- and few-shot classification tasks in nine diverse datasets spanning multiple domains including remote sensing, natural scenes, objects, animals, food, and textures. All datasets are used with their standard splits where available. We utilize the torchvision implementation for all datasets except RESISC45, which is obtained from the torchgeo library (Stewart et al., 2024). 

RESISC45 (Cheng et al., 2017) is a remote sensing image scene classification dataset containing 31,500 images across 45 scene classes, with 700 images per class at 256×256 pixel resolution. 

EuroSAT (Helber et al., 2019) consists of 27,000 Sentinel-2 satellite images covering 10 land use and land cover classes across European cities, with each image having 13 spectral bands at 64×64 pixels. 

Flowers102 (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008) contains 8,189 images of 102 flower categories commonly found in the United Kingdom, with high intra-class variation and inter-class similarity. 

OxfordPets (Parkhi et al., 2012) includes 7,349 images of 37 cat and dog breeds, providing a fine-grained classification challenge for animal recognition. 

Food101 (Bossard et al., 2014) comprises 101,000 images across 101 food categories, with 1,000 images per class, representing popular dishes from around the world. 13 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009) are widely-used benchmark datasets containing 60,000 32×32 color images. CIFAR-10 has 10 classes while CIFAR-100 has 100 classes, both with 6,000 and 600 images per class respectively. 

DTD (Cimpoi et al., 2014) (Describable Textures Dataset) contains 5,640 texture images organized into 47 categories, focusing on describable texture attributes rather than materials. 

Places365 (Zhou et al., 2018) is a scene-centric database designed for scene recognition and understanding. We use the Places365 validation set (50 images per class) instead of the larger test set (900 images per class) for computational efficiency. For zero-shot experiments, we evaluate on all 50 images per class. For few-shot experiments, we split each class into 10 training and 40 test images, then sample N ∈ { 1, 2, 4, 8} shots per class from the training set and evaluate on the 40 test images in each class. 

# D. Metrics 

In this work, we evaluated performance on both retrieval and classification tasks. Below we define each metric. 

Retrieval. For image–text and text–image retrieval, we employ the same standard metrics as in related work (Li et al., 2025). Mean Average Precision (mAP) Mean Average Precision summarizes the area under the precision–recall curve across all queries. For a single query q,

AP( q) = 1

RqNX

> k=1

P (k) 1{relevant at rank k},

where Rq is the number of relevant items for q, P (k) is precision at cutoff k, N is the length of the retrieved list and 1{·} is the indicator function that equals 1 if the item at rank k is relevant, and 0 otherwise. The mAP over Q queries is then 

mAP = 1

Q

> Q

X

> q=1

AP( q).

Note: In the Flickr30K dataset each image has 5 associated captions, so Rq = 5 for each image query. Precision at K (P@K) Precision at rank K measures the proportion of relevant items among the top-K results: 

P @K = Number of relevant items in top KK .

We report: • Image →Text : P @1 and P @5 

• Text →Image : P @1 

While we compute these retrieval metrics under both baseline and augmented conditions, in the main article we present metric gains (e.g. increase in mAP, and in P@1/5). This succinctly highlights the impact of our augmentation strategy. 

Classification accuracy For our classification experiments, we report Accuracy , defined as 

Accuracy = 100 × Number of correctly classified samples Total number of samples Accuracy is the most intuitive and widely used metric for balanced multi-class settings. 

# E. Post-hoc Vision-Language Alignment 

Formally, given an image encoder fI and a text encoder fT , we learn alignment functions g and ¯g such that g ◦ fI and ¯g ◦ fT

map images and texts into a shared latent space. In this space, images and texts with the same semantic content are assigned 14 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

similar embeddings, while those with different semantic concepts are placed far apart. These functions g and ¯g are learned using various methods, including CSA, text-to-concept, and MLP alignment. To centralize the information on the post-hoc alignment methods employed in this work, we summarize here how they are used with recycled classifier weights. In the weight-only setting, we form the alignment dataset Dweights = {(wi, f T (ti)) }Ci=1 ,where wi is the classifier-weight vector associated with class i and ti is the corresponding class name. For CSA, these pairs are used as standard paired samples and Canonical Correlation Analysis learns two linear mappings g and ¯g into a shared latent space. For text-to-concepts, we use the standard variant that learns a single linear mapping from text representations into the image/weight representation space. For MLP-alignment, we analogously learn a two-layer MLP from text representations into the image/weight representation space, leaving the image side unchanged. In the augmented setting, the same method is applied after replacing Dweights by Daug = Dimgtxt ∪ D weights .We provide some further information on the hyperparameter choices for the different alignment methodologies. MLP-alignment consists of learning a lightweight MLP to map text to image representations. The lightweight MLP consists of a two-layer multilayer perceptron with GELU (Hendrycks & Gimpel, 2023) activation that maps text representations into the image feature space. The hidden dimension is 4 times that of the input dimension. The MLP is trained using the AdamW (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2019) optimizer with an initial learning rate of 5 · 10 −3 and cosine loss. We found that performance for retrieval and classification downstream tasks plateaued after around 500 epochs, with little change when training for longer, so we fixed the number of epochs to 500. We anneal the learning rate following a cosine schedule without restarts (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017). Regarding the hyperparameters of CSA and text-to-concepts methods, the CSA method (Li et al., 2025) is implemented with the dimension of the shared representation space equal to 200 as we found out this was where downstream performance in cross-modal retrieval peaked. Similarly, the text-to-concept method is trained with MSE loss using an AdamW with cosine annealing schedule for 500 epochs. Since only lightweight MLPs are trained (two layers in the case of MLP-alignment and a single layer for text-to-concepts), the required training computational power is minimal. All experiments have been conducted on a GTX Titan Xp 12GB GPU where these lightweight models take at most a couple of minutes to train. For CSA, the heaviest operation is an SVD computation, which does not require GPU. All vision models are obtained from the checkpoint associated to ImageNet-21K task in Timm (Wightman, 2019) library. The checkpoint for the text encoder of CLIP ViT-B/32 model is that from torch.hub .

# F. Cross-modal retrieval 

Cross-modal retrieval operates on a set of candidate texts and images within a shared latent space. Given a query, the system retrieves the target whose embedding exhibits the highest similarity to the query. In text-to-image retrieval, the system selects the image with the highest similarity to the query text embedding; image-to-text retrieval follows the inverse procedure. The cross-modal retrieval results are reported for the two settings considered in the article: (i) vision-language encoders aligned solely through weight representations (where g and ¯g are learned without image-text pairs); and (ii) alignment augmented by weight representations, where we analyze the improvements gained from weight recycling. Table 4 shows the results for the first setting, where the BEiT-B/16 image encoder is endowed with vision-language capabilities by aligning it with CLIP’s text encoder. We observe that post-hoc alignment based on classification head representations yields non-trivial cross-modal retrieval performance. This demonstrates that semantic structures emerging during large-scale supervised pretraining can be leveraged to adapt the image backbone for these tasks without any paired data. Conversely, Table 5 presents the results for the second setting (specifically, the absolute values corresponding to the gains illustrated in Figure 4). Results for cross-modal retrieval when aligning other image encoders are shown in Table 5 (BEiT-B/16), Table 13 (CAFormer-S18), Table 14 (ConvFormer-S18), Table 15 (ConvNeXt-Base), and Table 16 (TinyViT-21M). 

Weight representations versus randomly sampled image representations. To complement the main-text analysis in Table 3, we address the concern that averaging image representations could remove instance-specific information useful for retrieval. We therefore compare MLP-alignment trained with ImageNet-1K classifier weights against the same protocol trained with one randomly sampled ImageNet-1K image representation per class, paired with the corresponding class name. We repeat the random-image sampling over multiple seeds and report mean and standard deviation. As shown in Table 6, classifier weights provide substantially stronger alignment data for Flickr30K retrieval than an equal number of sampled image representations. 15 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

Table 4. Zero-shot cross-modal retrieval for different alignment methods using only classification weights representations. 

Metric Alignment Datasets Method Flickr30K COCO 

i2t mAP CSA 0.3860 0.1842 MLP 0.4404 0.2075 Text2cpts 0.4271 0.2092 Random 0.0026 0.0006 i2t P@1 CSA 0.4980 0.2442 MLP 0.5370 0.2562 Text2cpts 0.4990 0.2540 Random 0.0010 0.0002 i2t P@5 CSA 0.3390 0.1668 MLP 0.3904 0.1854 Text2cpts 0.3754 0.1846 Random 0.0010 0.0002 t2i P@1 CSA 0.1242 0.0570 MLP 0.3350 0.1556 Text2cpts 0.3160 0.1433 Random 0.0010 0.0002 

Table 5. Cross-modal retrieval in Flickr30K for BEiT-B/16 aligned to CLIP-ViT-B/32’s text encoder for different alignment methods (with and without weight augmentation) and varying training sample sizes. Metrics evaluated are: Image to text Mean Average Precision (mAP), Top-1 Precision (P@1) and Top-5 Precision (P@5) and Text to Image Top-1 Precision (P@1). 

Img. encoder Metric Alignment +ImgNet Training set size method 21K 0 1K 5K 10K 30K BEiT-B/16 

i2t mAP CSA No 0.0668 0.3991 0.4561 0.4985 Yes 0.3860 0.4603 0.4829 0.4926 0.5067 

MLP No 0.3702 0.5090 0.5481 0.5903 Yes 0.4404 0.4945 0.5500 0.5730 0.6011 

Text2cpts No 0.4316 0.5563 0.5758 0.5895 

Yes 0.4271 0.5243 0.5654 0.5782 0.5893 i2t P@1 CSA No 0.0690 0.5110 0.5780 0.6410 Yes 0.4980 0.5900 0.6180 0.6500 0.6500 

MLP No 0.4450 0.6260 0.6730 0.7160 Yes 0.5370 0.6240 0.6720 0.6950 0.7300 

Text2cpts No 0.5270 0.6910 0.7100 0.7370 Yes 0.4990 0.6430 0.6870 0.7080 0.7380 

i2t P@5 CSA No 0.0558 0.3560 0.4074 0.4514 Yes 0.3390 0.4120 0.4290 0.4364 0.4520 

MLP No 0.3246 0.4534 0.4920 0.5260 Yes 0.3904 0.4430 0.4944 0.5124 0.5386 

Text2cpts No 0.3856 0.4976 0.5180 0.5252 

Yes 0.3754 0.4690 0.5090 0.5206 0.5240 t2i P@1 CSA No 0.0038 0.1070 0.1428 0.2432 

Yes 0.1242 0.1488 0.1804 0.1850 0.2244 MLP No 0.2766 0.3548 0.3766 0.3964 

Yes 0.3350 0.3406 0.3742 0.3786 0.3926 Text2cpts No 0.2786 0.3486 0.3574 0.3622 Yes 0.3160 0.3404 0.3580 0.3628 0.3636 

16 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling                                 

> Table 6. Flickr30K zero-shot retrieval performance for MLP-alignment trained on 1K ImageNet classifier weight representations versus one randomly sampled ImageNet image representation per class.
> Metric Weight repr. Image repr.
> i2t mAP 0.2751 0.1311 ±0.0074
> i2t P@1 0.3230 0.1486 ±0.0152
> i2t P@5 0.2388 0.1126 ±0.0065
> t2i P@1 0.2212 0.0942 ±0.0038
> Table 7. Zero-shot classification accuracy (%) for MLP-alignment trained on ImageNet-1K classifier weight representations versus one randomly sampled ImageNet image representation per class.
> Dataset Weight repr. Image repr.
> RESISC 21.16 14.19 ±2.97
> EuroSAT 17.70 16.18 ±2.58
> Flowers 11.82 5.90 ±2.38
> Pets 75.69 74.50 ±1.48
> Food 20.96 12.92 ±1.14
> CIFAR10 89.35 87.64 ±1.17
> CIFAR100 61.12 52.78 ±1.13
> DTD 22.71 15.43 ±1.25
> Places 24.32 15.24 ±0.91

# G. Zero-shot classification 

This experiment expands the zero-shot classification evaluation from the Experiments section in the paper by assessing aligned models zero-shot performance across a broader range of text encoders. The training details are exactly the same as those explained in the cross-modal retrieval (Section F). As usual, we consider two alignment settings: (i) image and text encoders aligned solely through weight representations (where g and ¯g are learned without image-text pairs); and (ii) alignment augmented by weight representations, where we analyze the improvements gained from weight recycling. In the first setting, we conduct experiments across the nine classification benchmarks introduced in Section C. Five image encoders are evaluated (BEiT-B/16 (Bao et al., 2021), CAFormer-S18, ConvFormer-S18, ConvNeXt-B, and TinyViT-21M) when paired with four text encoders, CLIP ViT-B/32 text encoder, RoBERTa (all-roberta-large-v1), MPNet (all-mpnet-base-v2), and MiniLM (all-MiniLM-L6-v2), with the latter three from the sentence-transformers library. We also evaluated ResNet and ViT CLIP vision-language models (Radford et al., 2021), which were trained on >400M image-text pairs to achieve aligned representations. For zero-shot evaluation, we follow the standard prompt-based classification procedure implemented in the released code. For each class, we encode the corresponding class prompt with the text encoder, map it with the learned alignment function, and assign a test image to the class whose aligned text representation has the highest cosine similarity with the aligned image representation. 

Weight representations versus image representations in zero-shot classification. As a complementary check to the retrieval control in Table 6, we repeat the comparison on zero-shot classification benchmarks using the same MLP-alignment protocol. Table 7 shows that classifier weights also outperform randomly sampled image representations across all evaluated datasets. Results presented in Table 10 show zero-shot accuracy when only ImageNet-21K pretraining classification weights are used to train the aligner MLP. The findings reveal consistent patterns across image encoders: the CLIP ViT-B/32 text encoder substantially outperforms text-only trained models, achieving best results in almost all configurations with performance gaps often exceeding 20-40 percentage points. Within each image encoder family, MPNet typically ranks second, followed by RoBERTa, while MiniLM generally shows the weakest performance. This superiority of accuracy could indicate CLIP’s text encoder has learned to represent language in a way that’s inherently connected to visual concepts through its training on image-caption pairs. The visual semantic understanding remains transferable even when the CLIP’s text encoder is paired with completely different image encoders from the one it was originally trained with. This suggests that CLIP’s 17 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

Figure 6. Mean zero-shot accuracy gains for BEiT-B/16 image encoder aligned to text on Flickr30K image-text pairs vs when augmenting alignment data with recycled ImageNet-21K weight representations. Zero-shot accuracy evaluated on: RESISC45, EuroSAT, Flowers102, OxfordPets, Food101, CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, DTD, and Places365. The shaded region indicates the standard deviation across datasets. 

advantage may not stem solely from jointly optimizing vision and text encoders, but specifically from CLIP’s text encoder having learned to represent visual concepts in a much more effective way. In contrast, sentence-transformer models, despite excelling at capturing semantic relationships in text, lack this visual grounding, since they were trained purely on textual data without any visual context. Regarding the setting in which weight representations are used together with image-text pairs for alignment, Table 8 presents the data from Figure 3. As an additional experiment, use Flickr30K image-text pairs to align the BEiT-B/16 image encoder to text, and compare zero-shot classification accuracy when using ImageNet-21K weights to augment this alignment data. The results, illustrated in Figure 6, demonstrate that incorporating weight representations alongside image-text pairs consistently enhances zero-shot classification accuracy across all post-hoc alignment methods. This further confirms compatibility between weight representations and image-text pairs for vision-language alignment. 

Zero-shot classification accuracy in a specialized domain dataset . In the setting of post-hoc alignment using only weight representations from ImageNet-21K pretraining, we evaluate downstream zero-shot classification on a specialized domain dataset that exhibits a significant distribution shift from ImageNet-21K. Specifically, we employ the HAM10000 dataset (Tschandl et al., 2018), a benchmark for dermatological skin lesion image classification comprising 7 classes. Table 9 compares our method (BEiT-B/16 aligned via recycled ImageNet-21K weights) against ViT CLIP baselines and a random classification baseline. We report Balanced Accuracy to account for class imbalance. The results indicate that the specialized nature of dermatological images presents a challenge for all evaluated Vision-Language Models. Both CLIP and our proposed method achieve performance only marginally above the random baseline (14.28%). In particular, our method achieves a balanced accuracy of 18.32%, similar to the CLIP ViT-B/32 variant (18.85%). This suggests that the alignment learned from ImageNet-21K weights is as robust as CLIP’s text-image alignment when applied to unseen images in specialized domains. In addition, these results confirm that for such specific tasks, fine-tuning is necessary for any general-purpose VLM. 

Table 8. Zero-shot classification accuracy. BEiT-B/16 encoders are aligned to text via MLP training using different representations: ImageNet-1K classification head weights, ImageNet-21K weights, and ImageNet-21K weights enhanced with one image-caption pair per class. CLIP ViT-B/16 results are included as a natively text-aligned reference model (Radford et al., 2021). Bold indicates best performance per dataset; underlined indicates second-best.                                                

> Image Encoder Alignment RESISC EUROSAT FLOWERS PETS FOOD CIFAR10 CIFAR100 DTD PLACES train data
> BEiT-B/16 IN1K repr. 21.16 17.70 11.82 75.69 20.96 89.35 61.12 22.71 24.32 IN21K repr. 24.21 23.67 62.63 78.06 57.12 94.40 73.66 35.37 34.34 IN21K repr. + 1 img-32.37 30.85 73.74 80.98 64.76 94.11 74.04 38.94 34.78 capt. pair per class CLIP ViT-B/16 WIT400M 57.14 51.93 65.96 88.31 86.04 89.67 68.05 43.99 38.96

18 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

Table 9. Zero-shot Balanced Accuracy on the HAM10000 (Tschandl et al., 2018) dataset. We compare post-hoc alignment on BEiT-B/16 with CLIP variants. We observe that all models struggle with this specialized domain, yet our weight-recycling approach performs on par with the CLIP variants. 

Model Balanced Accuracy (%) 

Random 14.28 CLIP ViT-B/32 18.85 

CLIP ViT-L/14@336px 17.72 BEiT-B/16 (Ours) 18.32 

Table 10. Zero-shot classification accuracy (%) of image and text encoders aligned with an MLP that was trained only on classification heads of ImageNet-21K pretraining. Checkpoint of text models: CLIP = Text encoder of CLIP ViT-B/32 model in torch.hub ,RoBERTa = all-roberta-large-v1, MPNet = all-mpnet-base-v2, MiniLM = all-MiniLM-L6-v2. Best result for each image encoder in each dataset is shown in bold and second-best is underlined . For reference, we evaluated ResNet and ViT CLIP vision-language models (Radford et al., 2021), which were trained on ≈400M image-text pairs to achieve aligned representations. 

Img. encoder Txt. encoder RESISC EUROSAT FLOWERS PETS FOOD CIFAR10 CIFAR100 DTD PLACES 

BEiT-B/16 CLIP 24.21 23.67 62.63 78.06 57.12 94.40 73.66 35.37 34.34 

BEiT-B/16 RoBERTa 18.54 17.15 38.54 35.32 29.48 92.12 65.93 16.28 25.86 BEiT-B/16 MPNet 20.95 18.15 35.75 36.14 27.20 92.70 67.37 18.78 26.29 BEiT-B/16 MiniLM 14.35 12.85 31.86 28.48 25.24 92.29 63.58 15.85 20.61 CAFormer-S18 CLIP 16.89 22.70 67.44 75.20 59.83 86.05 69.08 37.39 32.85 

CAFormer-S18 RoBERTa 16.11 20.70 40.80 33.96 34.54 89.33 66.15 12.87 27.33 CAFormer-S18 MPNet 18.52 20.48 42.92 46.96 32.69 86.76 67.36 15.05 25.28 CAFormer-S18 MiniLM 11.27 17.37 38.87 37.97 20.10 85.64 62.09 15.21 20.27 ConvFormer-S18 CLIP 19.71 23.93 66.12 75.47 54.92 85.03 65.85 37.82 32.67 

ConvFormer-S18 RoBERTa 17.33 16.44 35.47 38.81 32.30 85.98 62.40 12.71 26.57 ConvFormer-S18 MPNet 18.52 27.00 33.62 45.68 30.61 82.31 59.09 16.65 24.63 ConvFormer-S18 MiniLM 12.73 18.59 30.25 38.18 17.81 83.05 57.32 12.87 19.29 ConvNext-B CLIP 27.29 24.78 69.21 73.78 60.29 92.34 71.66 35.85 35.09 

ConvNext-B RoBERTa 22.79 19.15 29.81 25.48 28.75 90.99 67.04 16.91 27.96 ConvNext-B MPNet 24.65 23.63 40.80 42.00 30.52 91.81 68.68 19.73 28.48 ConvNext-B MiniLM 21.73 17.00 39.70 26.27 27.55 90.97 64.64 18.83 22.61 TinyViT-21M CLIP 28.33 26.48 68.42 76.81 57.30 89.69 69.39 35.59 33.80 

TinyViT-21M RoBERTa 22.75 21.48 34.90 26.76 22.09 86.94 65.05 14.84 25.91 TinyViT-21M MPNet 24.59 25.56 33.22 25.59 26.59 88.98 64.22 18.94 26.09 TinyViT-21M MiniLM 18.68 24.93 32.41 27.56 20.52 87.46 59.94 15.37 20.89 CLIP RN-101 41.37 26.70 61.99 86.24 79.83 77.77 48.52 39.68 36.00 CLIP RN-50 41.25 28.00 61.12 85.15 75.99 69.81 40.68 39.73 36.96 CLIP ViT-B/16 57.14 51.93 65.96 88.31 86.04 89.67 68.05 43.99 38.96 CLIP ViT-B/32 55.19 34.44 63.64 87.76 80.53 89.08 64.14 29.79 38.71 

# H. Few-shot classification 

Table 11. Full performance comparison across few-shot methods and number of shots per class K across all nine datasets. Experiments were conducted using five random seeds, and results are reported as mean ± standard deviation. Best results with statistical significance are in bold. 

K Method RESISC EUROSAT FLOWERS PETS FOOD CIFAR10 CIFAR100 DTD PLACES 

1Ours 43.51 ±1.28 56.65 ±4.06 95.59 ±0.65 84.20 ±0.88 67.53 ±0.59 93.34 ±0.27 75.14 ±0.25 47.36 ±1.34 35.51 %±0.22 

NCC 39.27 ±3.50 56.38 ±2.61 94.49 ±0.75 76.09 ±3.63 51.71 ±0.92 76.03 ±3.95 49.98 ±0.96 42.01 ±2.69 21.96 %±0.71 

KNN 39.27 ±3.50 56.38 ±2.61 94.49 ±0.75 76.09 ±3.63 51.71 ±0.92 76.03 ±3.95 49.98 ±0.96 42.01 ±2.69 21.96 %±0.71 

2Ours 52.14 ±0.95 64.59 ±3.82 97.41 ±0.70 85.98 ±0.51 70.96 ±0.61 93.86 ±0.49 75.77 ±0.09 53.73 ±1.72 35.94 %±0.22 

NCC 53.49 ±3.46 66.36 ±2.63 97.64 ±0.73 82.89 ±2.16 63.47 ±0.84 86.83 ±1.66 61.64 ±0.86 52.76 ±1.73 30.22 %±0.51 

KNN 38.77 ±2.89 52.17 ±3.08 93.69 ±0.35 73.99 ±0.98 50.07 ±1.82 71.67 ±4.65 48.50 ±0.80 41.58 ±3.04 22.49 %±0.38 

4Ours 58.54 ±0.74 75.66 ±2.41 98.80 ±0.20 89.60 ±0.77 74.41 ±0.61 94.81 ±0.36 76.42 ±0.22 62.04 ±0.95 41.98 %±0.35 

NCC 64.53 ±0.97 76.27 ±2.50 98.91 ±0.34 88.17 ±1.78 73.60 ±0.83 91.01 ±1.40 71.35 ±0.60 61.54 ±1.13 38.71 %±0.36 

KNN 51.26 ±1.13 67.25 ±2.36 97.08 ±0.38 82.73 ±1.67 63.49 ±0.89 84.69 ±1.15 62.41 ±0.56 51.64 ±1.51 28.77 %±0.34 

19 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling  

> Figure 7. Distribution of the cosine similarities for averaged image representations and classification weights corresponding to the Ima-geNet1K classes. W-W indicates the distribution of cosine similarities between weights, Img-Img between average image representations, and W-Img inter-modality cosine similarities.

We evaluate our few-shot classification approach on the nine diverse classification tasks across standard shot settings with 1, 2, and 4 shots per class, comparing against Nearest Centroid Classifier (NCC) and K-Nearest Neighbors (KNN) baselines on frozen backbones. NCC has been shown to be remarkably effective for few-shot classification, often surpassing more complex meta-learning approaches (Luo et al., 2023). Our sequential training methodology employs the same lightweight MLP architecture as used in cross-modal retrieval and zero-shot classification settings, trained with identical optimizer, scheduler, and loss configurations from previous experiments. The initial alignment stage trains for 500 epochs using only ImageNet-21K classification weights, followed by 200 epochs of fine-tuning on target dataset image-text pairs. Once the MLP is trained, we predict the class of a given image x by assigning it to the class text embedding is closest in cosine similarity to the MLP output for x. To assess statistical significance of accuracy improvements, we conduct five independent experimental runs where the exact same images are sampled for each class across all compared methods (ours, NCC, KNN) within each run, ensuring controlled comparison. We then perform paired t-tests on the resulting accuracy differences between methods, assuming normality of the accuracy distribution across runs, to validate the statistical significance of our method’s gains over NCC and KNN. Results are shown in Table 11, where our method frequently outperforms both NCC and KNN baselines with statistical significance (p-value < 0.05). As noted in the main article, the classification method based on sequential training and cosine classifier is probably suboptimal. However, it serves to illustrate that even a naive approach can be competitive when combined with our weight augmentation method. 

# I. Modality Gap Between Classification Head Weights and Image Representations 

While vision-language models like CLIP demonstrate effective alignment between text and image representations in shared latent spaces, prior work has identified a modality gap where representations from image and text data occupy distinct regions (Liang et al., 2022). We investigate whether a similar phenomenon exists between row vectors wi of the classification head weight matrix W and representations of images belonging to the corresponding classes. Specifically, we examine ImageNet-21K weights by extracting weight vectors for the 1K classes that correspond to ImageNet-1K, alongside averaged image representations computed from 50 images from each class in the ImageNet-1K. Following (Liang et al., 2022), we carry out two analyses: a permutation test of the centroid distances and an analysis of linear separability by training a single-layer MLP to distinguish between weight vectors and image representations. The permutation test evaluates whether the observed distance between modality centroids exceeds what would be expected by chance, by comparing the actual distance to a null distribution generated from random permutations of the data. Through this permutation testing of centroid distances, we observe a statistically significant separation: the distance between image and weight centroids (0.1723) substantially exceeds chance expectation (mean=0.0446, std=0.0014, p <0.001, Cohen’s d=93.91). Additionally, by training a single-layer MLP classifier to discriminate between weight and image representations using an 80/20 train-test split, the classifier correctly classifies 199/200 test weight samples and 200/200 test image samples. These findings suggest that despite semantic alignment, there exists a systematic geometric separation between classification head row vectors and image features. As shown in Figure 7, the distribution of cosine similarities between weights and image representations (W-Img) is clearly shifted towards lower values compared to the distributions within each modality (W-W and Img-Img). 

Testing modality gap mitigation strategies . Following the observation of the geometric separation between weight and 20 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling    

> (a)
> (b) Figure 8. Change in zero-shot classification (a) and retrieval (b) performance when using basic modality gap mitigation strategies. ImageNet-1K weights representations undergoing two different modality-gap mitigation strategies ( Center & Rescale and Lightweight projection ) are used as alignment data. The results show that explicitly mitigating the geometric modality gap did not result in better downstream performance.

image representations, we conducted preliminary experiments to determine if bridging this modality gap prior to alignment enhances downstream performance. We compared the baseline strategy (union from Equation (3)) against two explicit mitigation approaches applied to the ImageNet-1K weight representations: • Centering and rescaling: we subtract the mean of the weight representations (centering), adding the mean of the image representations (shifting towards the image modality) and rescaling the vectors to unit norm. • Lightweight projection: we introduced lightweight linear projection layers designed to map weight representations onto the image manifold, trained alongside the alignment objective. Figure 8 describes the increase in downstream zero-shot classification and retrieval performance across multiple benchmarks when modality-gap mitigation strategies are employed in alignment data. Our results indicate that the modality gap mitigation strategies do not improve downstream performance compared to the union approach from Equation (3). This is not surprising, as it aligns with observations in (Liang et al., 2022), which note that closing the modality gap does not necessarily guarantee better downstream performance. Consequently, since these mitigation techniques did not yield performance gains, we maintain the use of the original union strategy for this work and leave the exploration of more advanced gap mitigation techniques for future research. 

# J. Alignment using classifier weights from a domain-specific dataset 

In this section, we extend the evaluation of our proposed method by exploring how zero-shot classification accuracy varies when utilizing as alignment data weight representations from pretraining in domain-specific dataset iNaturalist (Van Horn et al., 2018). iNaturalist is a large-scale dataset characterized by fine-grained categories of flora and fauna, presenting a highly specialized semantic domain. The ConvNeXt checkpoint used as the image encoder was obtained from the Timm 

(Wightman, 2019) library. As shown in Table 12, the downstream performance is notably higher when using ImageNet-21K. This superior performance is likely due to the greater semantic overlap between the diverse ImageNet-21K classes and the classes found in the 21 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

Table 12. A comparison of zero-shot classification accuracy (%) for iNaturalist and ImageNet-21K weights serving as alignment data for training. We use ConvNeXt as image encoder.                                                                    

> Alignment Data RESISC EUROSAT FLOWERS PETS FOOD CIFAR10 CIFAR100 DTD PLACES method
> CSA ImageNet-21K 20.60 18.93 52.20 60.70 50.05 90.56 65.46 27.71 30.72
> iNaturalist 4.68 16.33 37.62 20.85 5.28 30.07 14.46 6.76 1.11 MLP ImageNet-21K 27.29 24.78 69.21 73.78 60.29 92.34 71.66 35.85 35.09
> iNaturalist 2.48 15.81 24.26 8.42 2.19 34.34 6.80 2.87 0.43 Text2cpts ImageNet-21K 24.33 20.52 55.41 71.16 51.26 91.75 65.90 32.66 31.66
> iNaturalist 2.60 9.26 42.67 17.20 2.90 37.45 17.38 8.83 0.44

Table 13. Cross-modal retrieval in Flickr30K for CAFormer-S18 aligned to CLIP-ViT-B/32’s text encoder for different alignment methods (with and without weight augmentation) and varying training sample sizes. Metrics evaluated are: Image to text Mean Average Precision (mAP), Top-1 Precision (P@1) and Top-5 Precision (P@5) and Text to Image Top-1 Precision (P@1). 

Img. encoder Metric Alignment +ImgNet Training set size method 21K 0 1K 5K 10K 30K CAFormer-S18 

i2t mAP CSA No 0.0033 0.2936 0.3941 0.4582 Yes 0.3182 0.4063 0.4275 0.4395 0.4635 

MLP No 0.3197 0.4471 0.4950 0.5391 

Yes 0.3745 0.3833 0.4352 0.4963 0.5362 Text2cpts No 0.3974 0.5184 0.5360 0.5485 

Yes 0.3696 0.4727 0.5176 0.5311 0.5436 i2t P@1 CSA No 0.0020 0.3390 0.4970 0.5690 Yes 0.4160 0.5020 0.5390 0.5440 0.5750 

MLP No 0.3800 0.5460 0.6210 0.6730 

Yes 0.4440 0.4650 0.5260 0.6170 0.6600 Text2cpts No 0.4980 0.6400 0.6600 0.6780 

Yes 0.4700 0.6120 0.6470 0.6680 0.6700 i2t P@5 CSA No 0.0012 0.2640 0.3524 0.4120 Yes 0.2818 0.3668 0.3816 0.3932 0.4168 

MLP No 0.2770 0.3964 0.4404 0.4868 

Yes 0.3336 0.3400 0.3870 0.4418 0.4842 Text2cpts No 0.3496 0.4626 0.4796 0.4920 

Yes 0.3316 0.4268 0.4628 0.4754 0.4898 t2i P@1 CSA No 0.0018 0.0578 0.1616 0.2186 Yes 0.0872 0.1260 0.1892 0.1772 0.2264 

MLP No 0.2456 0.3474 0.3842 0.4124 Yes 0.2892 0.2904 0.3752 0.3882 0.4126 

Text2cpts No 0.2464 0.2946 0.3056 0.3140 

Yes 0.2160 0.2698 0.2892 0.2974 0.3098 

downstream datasets. In contrast, the semantic variance within iNaturalist is limited to the biological domain. Consequently, it is reasonable to hypothesize that the alignment of the text and image encoders in the ImageNet-21K case is performed over a much broader and diverse region of the latent space. This hypothesis is supported by the observation that the iNaturalist-aligned models exhibit a clear domain preference: they achieve relatively higher accuracy on datasets containing plant and animal classes (such as Flowers102, Oxfordpets, and CIFAR (Nilsback & Zisserman, 2008; Parkhi et al., 2012; Krizhevsky & Hinton, 2009)) compared to non-biological datasets. However, it is important to note that despite this domain affinity, the absolute performance on these biological datasets remains lower than that of the ImageNet-21K-aligned models. Finally, we note that performance on some of the datasets lacking specific plant or animal content remains non-trivial, suggesting that despite the imperfect alignment, a meaningful amount of general semantic information is still being transferred. 22 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

Table 14. Cross-modal retrieval in Flickr30K for ConvFormer-S18 aligned to CLIP-ViT-B/32’s text encoder for different alignment methods (with and without weight augmentation) and varying training sample sizes. Metrics evaluated are: Image to text Mean Average Precision (mAP), Top-1 Precision (P@1) and Top-5 Precision (P@5) and Text to Image Top-1 Precision (P@1). 

Img. encoder Metric Alignment +ImgNet Training set size method 21K 0 1K 5K 10K 30K ConvFormer-S18 

i2t mAP CSA No 0.0027 0.2117 0.2933 0.3856 Yes 0.3156 0.3979 0.4222 0.4396 0.4578 

MLP No 0.3141 0.4468 0.4848 0.5321 

Yes 0.3956 0.3747 0.4392 0.4762 0.5302 Text2cpts No 0.3972 0.5145 0.5341 0.5475 

Yes 0.3807 0.4736 0.5174 0.5314 0.5436 i2t P@1 CSA No 0.0020 0.2510 0.3530 0.4840 Yes 0.4130 0.5050 0.5520 0.5650 0.5680 

MLP No 0.3820 0.5500 0.5840 0.6530 

Yes 0.4840 0.4660 0.5300 0.5940 0.6440 Text2cpts No 0.4940 0.6290 0.6520 0.6580 

Yes 0.4970 0.5940 0.6220 0.6470 0.6570 i2t P@5 CSA No 0.0006 0.1934 0.2646 0.3450 Yes 0.2790 0.3544 0.3718 0.3912 0.4090 

MLP No 0.2746 0.3928 0.4286 0.4796 

Yes 0.3498 0.3306 0.3912 0.4214 0.4786 Text2cpts No 0.3498 0.4582 0.4730 0.4894 

Yes 0.3396 0.4276 0.4670 0.4744 0.4884 t2i P@1 CSA No 0.0010 0.0652 0.0666 0.1424 Yes 0.0976 0.1608 0.1642 0.2026 0.2144 

MLP No 0.2432 0.3550 0.3834 0.4134 

Yes 0.3210 0.2794 0.3762 0.4100 0.4104 Text2cpts No 0.2376 0.2976 0.3140 0.3230 

Yes 0.2460 0.2724 0.2968 0.3098 0.3184 

23 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling 

Table 15. Cross-modal retrieval in Flickr30K for ConvNeXt-Base aligned to CLIP-ViT-B/32’s text encoder for different alignment methods (with and without weight augmentation) and varying training sample sizes. Metrics evaluated are: Image to text Mean Average Precision (mAP), Top-1 Precision (P@1) and Top-5 Precision (P@5) and Text to Image Top-1 Precision (P@1). 

Img. encoder Metric Alignment +ImgNet Training set size method 21K 0 1K 5K 10K 30K ConvNeXt-Base 

i2t mAP CSA No 0.0037 0.4125 0.4706 0.4972 Yes 0.3723 0.4695 0.4948 0.5008 0.5065 

MLP No 0.3722 0.5137 0.5475 0.5947 Yes 0.4422 0.4962 0.5496 0.5772 0.6065 

Text2cpts No 0.4580 0.5748 0.5912 0.6015 Yes 0.4182 0.5333 0.5821 0.5946 0.6025 

i2t P@1 CSA No 0.0020 0.5270 0.5730 0.6080 Yes 0.4610 0.5860 0.6180 0.6250 0.6270 

MLP No 0.4520 0.6300 0.6620 0.7350 Yes 0.5240 0.6110 0.6800 0.7120 0.7520 

Text2cpts No 0.5650 0.7130 0.7230 0.7230 Yes 0.4710 0.6430 0.7090 0.7260 0.7290 

i2t P@5 CSA No 0.0016 0.3656 0.4242 0.4412 Yes 0.3352 0.4212 0.4440 0.4522 0.4554 

MLP No 0.3296 0.4578 0.4892 0.5294 Yes 0.3918 0.4434 0.4916 0.5134 0.5424 

Text2cpts No 0.4060 0.5082 0.5278 0.5396 Yes 0.3726 0.4824 0.5164 0.5346 0.5404 

t2i P@1 CSA No 0.0014 0.1082 0.1892 0.2342 Yes 0.1740 0.1968 0.2512 0.2668 0.2546 

MLP No 0.2864 0.3796 0.4064 0.4350 

Yes 0.3594 0.3662 0.3948 0.4050 0.4306 Text2cpts No 0.2780 0.3408 0.3512 0.3624 

Yes 0.3114 0.3082 0.3368 0.3434 0.3592 

24 Supervised Classification Heads as Semantic Prototypes: Unlocking Vision-Language Alignment via Weight Recycling  

> Table 16. Cross-modal retrieval in Flickr30K for TinyViT-21M aligned to CLIP-ViT-B/32’s text encoder for different alignment methods (with and without weight augmentation) and varying training sample sizes. Metrics evaluated are: Image to text Mean Average Precision (mAP), Top-1 Precision (P@1) and Top-5 Precision (P@5) and Text to Image Top-1 Precision (P@1).

Img. encoder Metric Alignment +ImgNet Training set size method 21K 0 1K 5K 10K 30K TinyViT-21M 

i2t mAP CSA No 0.1501 0.4140 0.4578 0.4853 Yes 0.3792 0.4551 0.4807 0.4885 0.4896 

MLP No 0.3848 0.5032 0.5332 0.5721 Yes 0.4375 0.4861 0.5293 0.5459 0.5751 

Text2cpts No 0.4566 0.5450 0.5580 0.5678 Yes 0.4389 0.5145 0.5534 0.5635 0.5709 

i2t P@1 CSA No 0.1850 0.5230 0.5840 0.6280 

Yes 0.4780 0.5710 0.6040 0.6270 0.6200 MLP No 0.4780 0.6200 0.6740 0.6990 

Yes 0.5510 0.6210 0.6610 0.6610 0.6970 Text2cpts No 0.5900 0.6790 0.6970 0.7030 Yes 0.5380 0.6260 0.6790 0.7010 0.7090 

i2t P@5 CSA No 0.1314 0.3714 0.4082 0.4338 Yes 0.3438 0.4084 0.4316 0.4414 0.4422 

MLP No 0.3398 0.4490 0.4738 0.5098 Yes 0.3890 0.4292 0.4718 0.4890 0.5154 

Text2cpts No 0.4012 0.4808 0.4990 0.5058 Yes 0.3914 0.4656 0.4958 0.5070 0.5082 

t2i P@1 CSA No 0.0168 0.1184 0.2192 0.2404 

Yes 0.1420 0.1952 0.2330 0.2578 0.2278 MLP No 0.2682 0.3586 0.3756 0.3884 

Yes 0.3808 0.3186 0.3536 0.3646 0.3874 Text2cpts No 0.2878 0.3458 0.3574 0.3638 Yes 0.3570 0.3584 0.3590 0.3600 0.3662 

25